Peter Gatto

Abstract
Human mobility represents a crucial component of infectious disease transmission modeling. To investigate the interplay between Metro Transit Authority traffic and spatio-temoral patterns of COVID-19 transmission, I have integrated turnstile ridership data published by the New York City MTA with coronavirus case rates made available by the New York Department of Health. My motivating hypothesis has been that when people are using the subway, they are transorting coronavirus with them. The primary consideration of my research has been whether the timing of coronavirus outbreaks might be influenced by spatial patterns of public transit. I considered the period October 2020 - May 2021 because this period represents a distinct wave of transmission and has adequate data necessary for analysis. I found that there were spatial differences in the timing of this coronavirus outbreak by ZIP code and that there was a significant negative correlation between coronavirus caserates and MTA turnstile entries.

Design
The government of New York City collects and publishes extensive data, including the MTA turnstile and coronavirus caserate numbers that were used in this project. Processing these data will deliver public health insights that could be used for public engagement or contribute to public health or transportation policy. Ether department might be interested in the results of this exploratory data analysis, and one of the strengths of this project is that it integrated two data sources that might not otherwise be used together.

Data
My project has made use of two databases made public by the government of New York City: MTA turnstile entries and exits and Department of Health coronavirus caserates. The turnstile data includes cumulative entries and exits for each turnstile every four hours. The coronavirus diagnosis reports are published weekly by ZIP code. For these data sets to agree with each other, I grouped the turnstile data by ZIP code and considered only one point in time per week. This procedure had the additional benefit of cutting down on the size of the turstile data by approximately a factor of 42.

Algorithms
My preliminary cosideration of my project was investigating the timing of the October 2020 - May 2021 coronavirus outbreak in different areas of New York City. The first step in my analysis was to categorize ZIP codes according to whether they had more subway entries than exits (sources) or more exits than entries (sinks). The first method utilized for this purpose was the cross correlation function. I took one exemplary source ZIP code (10016) and one exemplary sink ZIP code (11235) and calculated the correlation between the time series to see if covid outbreaks in sources preempt ourbreaks in sinks. My project made extensive use of the mean week of epidemic calculations, which represented the mean in the distribution of covid diagnoses over a defined time period.

Tools
My preliminary data processing utilized DB Browser for SQLite. SQL queries made it simple to group the MTA turnstile by ZIP code, resulting in smaller, more manageable data structures for downstream analysis. The majority of my data analysis was performed in Python, which involved a number of helpful libraries. The most foundational of these were numpy and pandas. Most of the data used in this project were stored as pandas dataframes. Visualizations were produced using the matplotlib library, including cross correlation functions, scatterplots, and time series visualizations.

Communication
When delivering public health insights, it is especially important to communicate results that can be understood by the public. While some of the methods utilized are complicated, the project's findings are clear. The timing of coronavirus outbreaks varied significantly between neighborhoods of New York City. There seems to be a geographical component to this variation, with outbreaks occurring earlier in Manhattan and later in the outer boroughs. Finally, I found that as coronavirus diagnosis rates increased, subway ridership fell significantly and that ridership increased again as COVID-19 caserates began to fall.